So we deployed our static page with HTML, Javascript and CSS, what about our Node.js application
now?
Here we have code that needs to execute on the server, not in the client,
therefore this is not a static application,
it's a dynamic application because we have code that needs to execute directly on the server and by
the way, it does not matter if you have an application which produces HTML files and returns those
as we set it up at the beginning of the Node.js module
or if you have an application which just has a couple of routes and exchanges JSON data, that does not
matter,
you need to execute Node.js code on the server,
That is what matters.
So now we need a host that supports this and Firebase is not such a host.
Well they do have some cloud function service which actually allows you to execute code on the server
but it's a little bit different,
it's not really meant for this kind of deployment, even though technically there are ways of making it
work.
However it's not what we will use here,
instead if you for example Google for Node.js hosting, then you will find a couple of advertisements
and of course also real results that guide you towards Node.js hosting services
and of course you can perform a similar research for other languages like PHP as well.
Now one popular service for hosting Node.js applications is actually Heroku.
It's of course again not the only one,
AWS also has services for example but Heroku allows you to get started for free without a credit
card
just like Firebase and that of course is very convenient.
Now just as Firebase,
it also does have paid services and you should check the pricing pages there to learn more about that
but what I'm about to show you and these basic hosting demos, they all can be implemented for free there.
So we can simply visit the Heroku page there and it all starts with signing up, which you should do to
create a new Heroku account which you will need to then get started hosting your application there.
As I mentioned, you can get started for free,
you should check the pricing page to learn what cost you money though and up to which point it is free
and which limitations you have in a free account.
So here I did login now and if you signed up, you should see the same screen in the end and we can click
on create new app here and again, every hosting service of course differs regarding the exact steps you
need to perform but the documentation of the hosting service you chose will be the place to go to learn
how to get your application to run on that service then.
Here I'll again name this jsnodejs-deployment, any name you want, choose a region where it will be
deployed,
I'll go for United States, create app,
you don't need to do anything with that pipeline.
Now you've got a couple of options here regarding how you want to deploy, you should go for Heroku
Git here for which you need to have Git installed.
If you google for Git, you'll find that gitscm.com page, Git is a version control tool which allows
you to create multiple snapshots of your code whilst you are developing, it also can help you push
your code to remote repositories where you can store it or in the case of Heroku to Heroku's servers
and you can simply download Git from this Git page. Simply choose download here,
it should automatically select your operating system, otherwise you can select it from down there and
walk through the installer that gives you, this will install Git on your system. Attached you also find a link
where you can learn more about Git and get started with it, though here we won't need to do too much
with it.
Instead let's go back to Heroku's page here and make sure you also download the Heroku CLI or
you install the Heroku CLI.
Now for that, if you scroll down to download and install, there are various ways of installing it and you can
follow the instructions given here using the Windows installer or using this command here on Mac for example
or using the Mac installer if you can't use that command here and so on.
You can also use other installation methods here as you see, so in the end you should be able to get this
Heroku CLI onto your system. Now once you got the Heroku CLI installed, you can run Heroku login,
so here I'll copy that in my project folder and now you need to enter or confirm if you already were
logged in, your email and then enter your password.
Now once you are logged in, you can continue with these steps here,
if you installed Git which you need to have installed, you now have a git command available which you
can run,
so make sure you navigate into your project folder, which you already are here with built-in terminal,
and run
git init unless you already are managing this folder with GIt, which I am doing here and you might or
might not be doing that already.
So otherwise if you've never used git before,
simply run git init in your project folder now. Thereafter, you can copy this command here and simply
paste it in here in your project terminal and hit enter.
This will now basically configure your project here to be deployed as a Node.js application to this
Heroku application you just created.
So once you did that, these are three commands which you now need to execute to get your code onto your
Heroku app in the web here,
so to basically deploy your files.
Now I already added files and created a so-called commit which is basically a snapshot in code, so I will
just move on right away to this git push heroku master comment and execute this
and what this does is it now takes my latest snapshot which you created with the add command and the
commit command and try to push that to Heroku's servers. Now here,
it actually failed with an error message that no default language could be detected for this app,
so with that, a programming language is meant. To fix this,
go to your package.json file and add a new script there, you name it start and then simply write
node app.js here, this in the end will tell the server how it then starts your server. So with this script
added,
now let's create a new snapshot with git add . and git commit -m "added entry
script"
and thereafter repeat repeat that git push heroku master command which failed before.
If it still fails like it does for me here,
create a new file in your project, a proc file, simply name it like this,
no file extension and add this line into it,
web: node app.js,
so this is then your start
command here and a proc file is a file Heroku specifically looks for.
So then let's again run git add, git commit  -m "added proc file" and thereafter repeat that push command
and at this point it should certainly succeed. If it succeeded earlier,
that's of course also fine.
Now with that, you can go back to Heroku and there, click on open app
and this now is our server for this application.
Now of course, the application we deployed here is a node application which doesn't return any HTML
code anymore,
instead this connects it to a database and gets data from there and allows us to add data there.
So for example we can send a request this URL here and replace our location ID here with some ID
we might have or with some random text and if we now open the console or go to the network tab to
be precise and reload this, we of course see that this request fails.
Now obviously it fails because this server will actually not successfully connect to our cloud database
here, to a MongoDB database because there we haven't whitelisted the Heroku server yet.
So here you would have to go to network access and actually make sure that all IP addresses, so asked from
anywhere, is allowed,
people still need your username and your password but now we're not restricting this to our local IP
address anymore
and since Heroku in the free setting at least always assigns a new IP address, we want to allow all IP
addresses to be flexible there because we won't have a fixed IP address. So we'll have to do that to
make sure that Heroku is actually able to connect our Node.js application or with our application to
this database.
So let's wait for this to update here and with that completed, go back to your Heroku management page
here and under more, restart all diners which basically means restart your server, which we want to do
here to make sure that it cleanly restarts again because it will have crashed before. You can go back
to your web console and click on open app, now this will open your deployed application here in the browser.
Now of course for this default route, it will not find anything because in the application we deployed,
we only have two supported routes set up in location.js file
and by the way it does of course not matter whether you have a page that returns HTML or you have
a page that exchanges JSON like ours,
you need to visit a route that exists, unless you have a general fallback route which we here haven't,
we have no 404 fallback route.
So now we can for example enter this URL though, of course enter something here instead of that
dummy placeholder for the ID and hit enter. Now chances are that this will take very long and/or
crash at some point.
The reason for that simply is that this is an invalid string to be used as an ID and therefore here
when we try to convert this to an object ID, this will actually fail, cause an error and since we
have no proper error handling here which you of course would learn about in my Node.js course, this crashes.
Now again, I do cover error handling in great detail in my Node.js course of course, since that's not
the focus of this course,
I decided not to dive deeply into it. Here the problem is that we have an unhandled error and therefore
our server crashes after some time.
Theoretically though, it would work and just to prove this,
I searched for the ID which we use in the past which we created in an earlier module, I'll restart
my server here because it crashed and of course therefore you should have error handling in a real application
but here I'll restart it and I'll try to fetch data for my valid location ID here.
So this alone won't do the trick though, it will still fail and the reason for that is quite trivial,
one preparation was missing, in app.js I'm listening to port 3000.
Now actually when we plan on deploying this to a real server, we don't want to use this dummy port which
we only use locally,
instead we want to use the port the server we push this to assigns to us and we can tell Node.js
to do that,
we need define the 3000 as an alternative here by adding two pipe symbols in front of it and
instead refer to process.env.port here as a main value.
Now what does this do? This looks strange at first but this uses a system built into Node.js called
environment variables.
This in the end is a placeholder where the concrete value will be injected dynamically by the environment
that runs our script.
Now if it's not provided, for example during development when we start the script, we'll fall back to 3000.
If it is provided however and Heroku will provide a value for this port variable,
this provided data will be used instead,
so Heroku can provide its own port where we want to listen instead of that 3000 port which is just
there for development.
So now with that, we just have to add this change here,
added port-env and then again push this to Heroku and there wait for the installation and the build
process and the startup to finish and thereafter we should be able to visit and run our application.
So let's wait for that to finish up and thereafter once you revisit this page, you should get your location
data.
So this is how you could deploy a Node.js application to Heroku, of course Heroku is just one of many
hosts, a couple of steps are always the same though like providing this environment variable, catching
errors is a good idea which you might consider implementing,
you'll also want to make sure that you whitelist the IP address of the server where your application
runs or if you don't know the IP or if it changes frequently, you whitelist all IPs as we did it here
and with that, you're able to also deploy applications that use Javascript on the server, namely Node.js